README.md, before:

# Aletheia-Probe: Automated Integrity Checks for Academic Journals & Conferences

[![CI/CD Pipeline](https://github.com/sustainet-guardian/aletheia-probe/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/sustainet-guardian/aletheia-probe/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Python 3.10+](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.10+-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)

> **🚧 Beta Release (v0.1.0)** - This tool is currently in beta testing. We welcome feedback and bug reports from early adopters. See [BETA-TESTING.md](BETA-TESTING.md) for how to help test and provide feedback.

Aletheia-Probe is a comprehensive command-line tool for evaluating the legitimacy of academic journals and conferences. By aggregating data from authoritative sources and applying advanced pattern analysis, it helps researchers, librarians, and institutions detect predatory venues and ensure the integrity of scholarly publishing.

### About the Name

The name "Aletheia" (ἀλήθεια) comes from ancient Greek philosophy, where it represents the concept of truth and unconcealment. In Greek mythology, Aletheia was personified as the goddess or spirit (daimona) of truth and sincerity. This reflects the tool's core mission: to reveal the truth about academic journals and conferences, helping researchers distinguish legitimate venues from predatory ones. The suffix "-Probe" emphasizes the tool's investigative nature—actively examining and uncovering the reality behind scholarly publishing claims.

## TL;DR

```bash
# Beta release - Install from source
# (PyPI package coming with v1.0 stable release)

# First, install unrar/unar if not already available
# (required for one data source - which is skipped if unrar is not found)
# Debian/Ubuntu:
sudo apt-get install unrar
# macOS:
brew install unar
# Windows (via chocolatey):
choco install unrar

git clone https://github.com/sustainet-guardian/aletheia-probe.git
cd aletheia-probe
pip install -e .

# First time: Sync data sources (takes a few minutes)
aletheia-probe sync

# Check the current state of the cache database
aletheia-probe status

# Assess a single journal
aletheia-probe journal "Journal of Computer Science"

# Assess all journals in a BibTeX file (returns exit code 1 if predatory journals found)
aletheia-probe bibtex references.bib

# Get detailed analysis with confidence scores from multiple sources
aletheia-probe journal --format json "Nature Reviews Drug Discovery"
```

**Output**: Combines data from multiple authoritative sources and advanced pattern analysis to provide confidence-scored assessments of journal legitimacy.

**Note**: The first sync downloads and processes data from multiple sources (DOAJ, Beall's List, etc.), which takes a few minutes. After that, queries typically complete in under 5 seconds.

## Data Sources

This tool acts as a **data aggregator** - it doesn't provide data itself, but combines information from multiple authoritative sources:

- **DOAJ** - Directory of Open Access Journals
- **Beall's List** - Historical predatory journal archives
- **Algerian Ministry** - Algerian Ministry of Higher Education predatory journals list
- **OpenAlex** - Publication pattern analysis
- **Crossref** - Metadata quality assessment
- **Retraction Watch** - Journal retraction history analysis
- **Scopus** - Optional premium journal database
- **Institutional Lists** - Custom whitelist/blacklist configurations
- **Cross-Validator** - Cross-source consistency validation system
- **Kscien Standalone Journals** - Individual predatory journals identified by Kscien
- **Kscien Publishers** - Known predatory publishers
- **Kscien Hijacked Journals** - Legitimate journals that have been hijacked by predatory actors
- **Kscien Predatory Conferences** - Database of predatory conferences

The tool analyzes publication patterns, citation metrics, and metadata quality to provide comprehensive coverage beyond traditional blacklist/whitelist approaches.

**Note on Conference Assessment**: Conference checking is currently limited compared to journal assessment. The primary source for conference evaluation is the Kscien Predatory Conferences database. Most other data sources focus exclusively on journals, so conference assessments may have less comprehensive coverage and fewer cross-validation opportunities.

## Quick Start

See the [Quick Start Guide](docs/quick-start.md) for installation instructions and basic usage examples.

## Assessment Methodology

The tool uses a **hybrid approach** combining curated databases with advanced pattern analysis to achieve comprehensive coverage and high accuracy.

### Backend Types

#### **Curated Databases** (High Trust)
These provide authoritative yes/no decisions for journals they cover:

| Backend | Type | Coverage | Purpose |
|---------|------|----------|---------|
| **DOAJ** | Legitimate OA journals | 22,000+ journals | Gold standard for open access legitimacy |
| **Scopus** (optional) | Legitimate indexed journals | 30,000+ journals | Major subscription and OA journals |
| **Beall's List** | Predatory journal archives | ~2,900 entries | Historically identified predatory publishers |
| **PredatoryJournals.org** | Predatory journals/publishers | Community-maintained | Curated lists from predatoryjournals.org |
| **Algerian Ministry** | Predatory journal list | ~3,300 entries | Ministry of Higher Education predatory journals |
| **Kscien Standalone Journals** | Predatory journals | 1,400+ entries | Individual predatory journals identified by Kscien |
| **Kscien Publishers** | Predatory publishers | 1,200+ entries | Known predatory publishers |
| **Kscien Hijacked Journals** | Hijacked journals | ~200 entries | Legitimate journals compromised by predatory actors |
| **Kscien Predatory Conferences** | Predatory conferences | ~450 entries | Identified predatory conference venues |
| **Retraction Watch** | Quality indicator | ~27,000 journals | Retraction rates and patterns for quality assessment |
| **Institutional Lists** | Custom whitelist/blacklist | Organization-specific | Local policy enforcement |

#### **Pattern Analysis** (Evidence-Based)
These analyze publication patterns and metadata quality to detect predatory characteristics:

| Backend | Data Source | What It Analyzes | Key Indicators |
|---------|-------------|------------------|----------------|
| **OpenAlex Analyzer** | OpenAlex API (240M+ works) | Publication volume, citation patterns, author diversity, growth rates | Abnormal publication volumes (>1000/year), suspicious citation ratios, rapid growth patterns |
| **Crossref Analyzer** | Crossref metadata API | Metadata completeness, abstracts, references, author information | Missing metadata, poor quality abstracts (<100 chars), low reference counts |
| **Cross-Validator** | Cross-source data | Publisher name consistency, data correlation across sources | Mismatched publisher names, data inconsistencies between sources |

### How Assessment Works

#### **1. Multi-Backend Query**
The tool queries all enabled backends concurrently for comprehensive coverage:

```
Journal Query → [Curated Databases + Pattern Analyzers] → Combined Assessment
                 │
                 ├─ DOAJ (legitimate OA)
                 ├─ Scopus (indexed journals)
                 ├─ Beall's List (predatory)
                 ├─ PredatoryJournals.org
                 ├─ Kscien databases
                 ├─ Retraction Watch (quality)
                 ├─ OpenAlex Analyzer (patterns)
                 ├─ Crossref Analyzer (metadata)
                 └─ Cross-Validator (consistency)
```

**Note**: Not all backends will find every journal. A journal may be:
- Found in DOAJ → strong legitimate evidence
- Found in Beall's → strong predatory evidence
- Not found in any curated database → rely on pattern analysis
- Found in contradictory sources → cross-validation resolves conflicts

#### **2. Assessment Logic**

**Curated Database Results (Authoritative)**:
- **DOAJ/Scopus match** → Classified as `legitimate` (high confidence)
- **Predatory list match** → Classified as `predatory` (high confidence)
- **No matches found** → Proceed to pattern analysis

**Pattern Analysis (Evidence-Based)**:
When curated databases don't have the journal, pattern analyzers evaluate quality:

**🟢 Legitimacy Indicators (OpenAlex/Crossref)**:
- Consistent publication volume (20-500 papers/year)
- Healthy citation patterns (>3 citations/paper average)
- Complete metadata (abstracts >100 chars, references, author ORCIDs)
- Recognized publisher with history
- Stable growth patterns

**🔴 Predatory Indicators (OpenAlex/Crossref)**:
- Publication mill patterns (>1000 papers/year)
- Extremely low citations (<0.5/paper)
- Incomplete metadata (no abstracts, missing author info)
- Suspicious/unknown publisher
- Sudden publication volume spikes

#### **3. Confidence Scoring**
Final confidence is determined by:
- **Source authority**: DOAJ/Scopus > Pattern analysis > Smaller lists
- **Agreement**: Multiple sources agreeing → higher confidence
- **Evidence strength**: Strong indicators > weak signals
- **Cross-validation**: Consistent data across sources increases confidence
- **Retraction data**: High retraction rates lower confidence for "legitimate" journals

#### **4. Result Combination**
The dispatcher aggregates all backend results:
- Conflicting assessments are resolved by source weight
- Multiple agreeing sources boost confidence
- Pattern analysis supplements curated databases
- Detailed reasoning explains the assessment

### Example Assessment Scenarios

#### **Scenario 1: Well-Known Legitimate Journal**
```
Input: "Nature"
│
├─ DOAJ: ✗ Not found (subscription journal, not open access)
├─ Scopus: ✓ Found → "legitimate"
├─ Predatory Lists: ✗ Not found
├─ Retraction Watch: ✓ Found → 153 retractions, 0.034% rate (within normal)
├─ OpenAlex: ✓ Found → 446,231 publications, healthy citations
├─ Crossref: ✓ Found → Complete metadata, Nature Publishing Group
│
Result: LEGITIMATE (confidence: 0.95)
Reasoning: "Found in Scopus with excellent publication patterns and metadata quality"
```

#### **Scenario 2: Known Predatory Journal**
```
Input: "International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications"
│
├─ DOAJ: ✗ Not found
├─ Predatory Lists: ✓ Found in Kscien database → "predatory"
├─ Retraction Watch: ✗ Not found
├─ OpenAlex: ✓ Found → High volume (>800/year), low citations
├─ Crossref: ✓ Found → Poor metadata quality
│
Result: PREDATORY (confidence: 0.90)
Reasoning: "Listed in Kscien predatory database, confirmed by publication patterns"
```

#### **Scenario 3: Unknown Journal (Pattern Analysis)**
```
Input: "Emerging Regional Journal"
│
├─ DOAJ: ✗ Not found
├─ Scopus: ✗ Not found
├─ Predatory Lists: ✗ Not found
├─ OpenAlex: ✓ Found → 150 papers/year, 5 citations/paper average
├─ Crossref: ✓ Found → Good metadata, established publisher
│
Result: INSUFFICIENT_DATA (confidence: 0.45)
Reasoning: "Not in major databases; pattern analysis suggests legitimate practices but low confidence"
```

### Optional: Scopus Journal List

To enhance coverage with Scopus data:

1. Download the spreadsheet from [researchgate.net](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/384898389_Last_Update_of_Scopus_Indexed_Journal's_List_-_October_2024)
2. Create directory: `mkdir -p .aletheia-probe/scopus`
3. Place Excel file (e.g., `ext_list_October_2024.xlsx`) in this directory
4. Run `aletheia-probe sync` to process the data

**Benefits**: Adds nearly 30,000 subscription journals from major publishers (Elsevier, Springer, Wiley, etc.)

## Documentation

- [Quick Start Guide](docs/quick-start.md) - Installation and basic usage
- [User Guide](docs/user-guide.md) - Comprehensive usage examples and features
- [Configuration Reference](docs/configuration.md) - All configuration options
- [Contributing Guide](.github/community/CONTRIBUTING.md) - Development setup and guidelines
- [Troubleshooting](docs/troubleshooting.md) - Common issues and solutions


## License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

Commit message:

docs: encourage AI coding agent use in development workflow
Added prominent documentation encouraging the use of AI coding agents
as valued development tools throughout the project.

Changes:
- Added "AI-Assisted Development" section to README with guidelines
  for AI-assisted contributions including review requirements,
  quality standards, optional transparency tagging, and security
  considerations
- Updated CONTRIBUTING.md with concise reference to AI guidelines
  and key contributor responsibilities
- Enhanced AICodingAgent.md header to explicitly communicate the
  project's positive stance on AI agent usage

This addresses issue #9 by clearly communicating that AI coding
agents are welcome and valued tools for problem-solving, code
generation, review, and learning, while maintaining accountability
for code quality and security.

README.md, after:

# Aletheia-Probe: Automated Integrity Checks for Academic Journals & Conferences

[![CI/CD Pipeline](https://github.com/sustainet-guardian/aletheia-probe/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/sustainet-guardian/aletheia-probe/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Python 3.10+](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.10+-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)

> **🚧 Beta Release (v0.1.0)** - This tool is currently in beta testing. We welcome feedback and bug reports from early adopters. See [BETA-TESTING.md](BETA-TESTING.md) for how to help test and provide feedback.

Aletheia-Probe is a comprehensive command-line tool for evaluating the legitimacy of academic journals and conferences. By aggregating data from authoritative sources and applying advanced pattern analysis, it helps researchers, librarians, and institutions detect predatory venues and ensure the integrity of scholarly publishing.

### About the Name

The name "Aletheia" (ἀλήθεια) comes from ancient Greek philosophy, where it represents the concept of truth and unconcealment. In Greek mythology, Aletheia was personified as the goddess or spirit (daimona) of truth and sincerity. This reflects the tool's core mission: to reveal the truth about academic journals and conferences, helping researchers distinguish legitimate venues from predatory ones. The suffix "-Probe" emphasizes the tool's investigative nature—actively examining and uncovering the reality behind scholarly publishing claims.

## TL;DR

```bash
# Beta release - Install from source
# (PyPI package coming with v1.0 stable release)

# First, install unrar/unar if not already available
# (required for one data source - which is skipped if unrar is not found)
# Debian/Ubuntu:
sudo apt-get install unrar
# macOS:
brew install unar
# Windows (via chocolatey):
choco install unrar

git clone https://github.com/sustainet-guardian/aletheia-probe.git
cd aletheia-probe
pip install -e .

# First time: Sync data sources (takes a few minutes)
aletheia-probe sync

# Check the current state of the cache database
aletheia-probe status

# Assess a single journal
aletheia-probe journal "Journal of Computer Science"

# Assess all journals in a BibTeX file (returns exit code 1 if predatory journals found)
aletheia-probe bibtex references.bib

# Get detailed analysis with confidence scores from multiple sources
aletheia-probe journal --format json "Nature Reviews Drug Discovery"
```

**Output**: Combines data from multiple authoritative sources and advanced pattern analysis to provide confidence-scored assessments of journal legitimacy.

**Note**: The first sync downloads and processes data from multiple sources (DOAJ, Beall's List, etc.), which takes a few minutes. After that, queries typically complete in under 5 seconds.

## Data Sources

This tool acts as a **data aggregator** - it doesn't provide data itself, but combines information from multiple authoritative sources:

- **DOAJ** - Directory of Open Access Journals
- **Beall's List** - Historical predatory journal archives
- **Algerian Ministry** - Algerian Ministry of Higher Education predatory journals list
- **OpenAlex** - Publication pattern analysis
- **Crossref** - Metadata quality assessment
- **Retraction Watch** - Journal retraction history analysis
- **Scopus** - Optional premium journal database
- **Institutional Lists** - Custom whitelist/blacklist configurations
- **Cross-Validator** - Cross-source consistency validation system
- **Kscien Standalone Journals** - Individual predatory journals identified by Kscien
- **Kscien Publishers** - Known predatory publishers
- **Kscien Hijacked Journals** - Legitimate journals that have been hijacked by predatory actors
- **Kscien Predatory Conferences** - Database of predatory conferences

The tool analyzes publication patterns, citation metrics, and metadata quality to provide comprehensive coverage beyond traditional blacklist/whitelist approaches.

**Note on Conference Assessment**: Conference checking is currently limited compared to journal assessment. The primary source for conference evaluation is the Kscien Predatory Conferences database. Most other data sources focus exclusively on journals, so conference assessments may have less comprehensive coverage and fewer cross-validation opportunities.

## Quick Start

See the [Quick Start Guide](docs/quick-start.md) for installation instructions and basic usage examples.

## Assessment Methodology

The tool uses a **hybrid approach** combining curated databases with advanced pattern analysis to achieve comprehensive coverage and high accuracy.

### Backend Types

#### **Curated Databases** (High Trust)
These provide authoritative yes/no decisions for journals they cover:

| Backend | Type | Coverage | Purpose |
|---------|------|----------|---------|
| **DOAJ** | Legitimate OA journals | 22,000+ journals | Gold standard for open access legitimacy |
| **Scopus** (optional) | Legitimate indexed journals | 30,000+ journals | Major subscription and OA journals |
| **Beall's List** | Predatory journal archives | ~2,900 entries | Historically identified predatory publishers |
| **PredatoryJournals.org** | Predatory journals/publishers | Community-maintained | Curated lists from predatoryjournals.org |
| **Algerian Ministry** | Predatory journal list | ~3,300 entries | Ministry of Higher Education predatory journals |
| **Kscien Standalone Journals** | Predatory journals | 1,400+ entries | Individual predatory journals identified by Kscien |
| **Kscien Publishers** | Predatory publishers | 1,200+ entries | Known predatory publishers |
| **Kscien Hijacked Journals** | Hijacked journals | ~200 entries | Legitimate journals compromised by predatory actors |
| **Kscien Predatory Conferences** | Predatory conferences | ~450 entries | Identified predatory conference venues |
| **Retraction Watch** | Quality indicator | ~27,000 journals | Retraction rates and patterns for quality assessment |
| **Institutional Lists** | Custom whitelist/blacklist | Organization-specific | Local policy enforcement |

#### **Pattern Analysis** (Evidence-Based)
These analyze publication patterns and metadata quality to detect predatory characteristics:

| Backend | Data Source | What It Analyzes | Key Indicators |
|---------|-------------|------------------|----------------|
| **OpenAlex Analyzer** | OpenAlex API (240M+ works) | Publication volume, citation patterns, author diversity, growth rates | Abnormal publication volumes (>1000/year), suspicious citation ratios, rapid growth patterns |
| **Crossref Analyzer** | Crossref metadata API | Metadata completeness, abstracts, references, author information | Missing metadata, poor quality abstracts (<100 chars), low reference counts |
| **Cross-Validator** | Cross-source data | Publisher name consistency, data correlation across sources | Mismatched publisher names, data inconsistencies between sources |

### How Assessment Works

#### **1. Multi-Backend Query**
The tool queries all enabled backends concurrently for comprehensive coverage:

```
Journal Query → [Curated Databases + Pattern Analyzers] → Combined Assessment
                 │
                 ├─ DOAJ (legitimate OA)
                 ├─ Scopus (indexed journals)
                 ├─ Beall's List (predatory)
                 ├─ PredatoryJournals.org
                 ├─ Kscien databases
                 ├─ Retraction Watch (quality)
                 ├─ OpenAlex Analyzer (patterns)
                 ├─ Crossref Analyzer (metadata)
                 └─ Cross-Validator (consistency)
```

**Note**: Not all backends will find every journal. A journal may be:
- Found in DOAJ → strong legitimate evidence
- Found in Beall's → strong predatory evidence
- Not found in any curated database → rely on pattern analysis
- Found in contradictory sources → cross-validation resolves conflicts

#### **2. Assessment Logic**

**Curated Database Results (Authoritative)**:
- **DOAJ/Scopus match** → Classified as `legitimate` (high confidence)
- **Predatory list match** → Classified as `predatory` (high confidence)
- **No matches found** → Proceed to pattern analysis

**Pattern Analysis (Evidence-Based)**:
When curated databases don't have the journal, pattern analyzers evaluate quality:

**🟢 Legitimacy Indicators (OpenAlex/Crossref)**:
- Consistent publication volume (20-500 papers/year)
- Healthy citation patterns (>3 citations/paper average)
- Complete metadata (abstracts >100 chars, references, author ORCIDs)
- Recognized publisher with history
- Stable growth patterns

**🔴 Predatory Indicators (OpenAlex/Crossref)**:
- Publication mill patterns (>1000 papers/year)
- Extremely low citations (<0.5/paper)
- Incomplete metadata (no abstracts, missing author info)
- Suspicious/unknown publisher
- Sudden publication volume spikes

#### **3. Confidence Scoring**
Final confidence is determined by:
- **Source authority**: DOAJ/Scopus > Pattern analysis > Smaller lists
- **Agreement**: Multiple sources agreeing → higher confidence
- **Evidence strength**: Strong indicators > weak signals
- **Cross-validation**: Consistent data across sources increases confidence
- **Retraction data**: High retraction rates lower confidence for "legitimate" journals

#### **4. Result Combination**
The dispatcher aggregates all backend results:
- Conflicting assessments are resolved by source weight
- Multiple agreeing sources boost confidence
- Pattern analysis supplements curated databases
- Detailed reasoning explains the assessment

### Example Assessment Scenarios

#### **Scenario 1: Well-Known Legitimate Journal**
```
Input: "Nature"
│
├─ DOAJ: ✗ Not found (subscription journal, not open access)
├─ Scopus: ✓ Found → "legitimate"
├─ Predatory Lists: ✗ Not found
├─ Retraction Watch: ✓ Found → 153 retractions, 0.034% rate (within normal)
├─ OpenAlex: ✓ Found → 446,231 publications, healthy citations
├─ Crossref: ✓ Found → Complete metadata, Nature Publishing Group
│
Result: LEGITIMATE (confidence: 0.95)
Reasoning: "Found in Scopus with excellent publication patterns and metadata quality"
```

#### **Scenario 2: Known Predatory Journal**
```
Input: "International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications"
│
├─ DOAJ: ✗ Not found
├─ Predatory Lists: ✓ Found in Kscien database → "predatory"
├─ Retraction Watch: ✗ Not found
├─ OpenAlex: ✓ Found → High volume (>800/year), low citations
├─ Crossref: ✓ Found → Poor metadata quality
│
Result: PREDATORY (confidence: 0.90)
Reasoning: "Listed in Kscien predatory database, confirmed by publication patterns"
```

#### **Scenario 3: Unknown Journal (Pattern Analysis)**
```
Input: "Emerging Regional Journal"
│
├─ DOAJ: ✗ Not found
├─ Scopus: ✗ Not found
├─ Predatory Lists: ✗ Not found
├─ OpenAlex: ✓ Found → 150 papers/year, 5 citations/paper average
├─ Crossref: ✓ Found → Good metadata, established publisher
│
Result: INSUFFICIENT_DATA (confidence: 0.45)
Reasoning: "Not in major databases; pattern analysis suggests legitimate practices but low confidence"
```

### Optional: Scopus Journal List

To enhance coverage with Scopus data:

1. Download the spreadsheet from [researchgate.net](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/384898389_Last_Update_of_Scopus_Indexed_Journal's_List_-_October_2024)
2. Create directory: `mkdir -p .aletheia-probe/scopus`
3. Place Excel file (e.g., `ext_list_October_2024.xlsx`) in this directory
4. Run `aletheia-probe sync` to process the data

**Benefits**: Adds nearly 30,000 subscription journals from major publishers (Elsevier, Springer, Wiley, etc.)

## Documentation

- [Quick Start Guide](docs/quick-start.md) - Installation and basic usage
- [User Guide](docs/user-guide.md) - Comprehensive usage examples and features
- [Configuration Reference](docs/configuration.md) - All configuration options
- [Contributing Guide](.github/community/CONTRIBUTING.md) - Development setup and guidelines
- [Troubleshooting](docs/troubleshooting.md) - Common issues and solutions

## AI-Assisted Development

This project explicitly encourages and welcomes the use of AI coding agents as part of the development workflow. AI tools are valuable for:

- Code generation and refactoring
- Writing tests and documentation
- Code review and quality improvement
- Problem-solving and debugging
- Learning and exploring the codebase

**Guidelines for AI-Assisted Contributions:**

1. **Review and Verify**: All AI-generated code must be thoroughly reviewed, tested, and understood before submission
2. **Quality Standards**: AI-assisted code must meet the same quality standards as manually written code (see [AICodingAgent.md](AICodingAgent.md))
3. **Transparency**: Contributors may optionally indicate AI assistance in commit messages or PR descriptions using tags like `[AI-assisted]` for transparency
4. **Responsibility**: Contributors remain fully responsible for all submitted code, regardless of how it was generated
5. **Security**: Extra attention should be paid to security implications of AI-generated code

For detailed guidelines on using AI coding agents with this project, see [AICodingAgent.md](AICodingAgent.md).

## License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.
