docs/user-guide.md, before:

# User Guide

This comprehensive guide covers all aspects of using the Journal Assessment Tool for evaluating academic journals.

## Table of Contents

1. [Overview](#overview)
2. [Installation](#installation)
3. [Quick Start](#quick-start)
4. [Command Line Usage](#command-line-usage)
5. [Output Formats](#output-formats)
6. [Understanding Results](#understanding-results)
7. [Configuration](#configuration)
8. [Data Sources](#data-sources)
9. [Best Practices](#best-practices)
10. [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)

## Overview

The Journal Assessment Tool helps researchers and institutions evaluate whether academic journals are legitimate or potentially predatory by checking multiple authoritative data sources and providing confidence-scored assessments.

### Key Features

- **Multi-source verification**: Combines DOAJ, Beall's List, Retraction Watch, and institutional data
- **BibTeX batch processing**: Assess entire bibliographies from BibTeX files with automated exit codes
- **Intelligent matching**: Handles name variations, ISSNs, and publisher information
- **Confidence scoring**: Provides probabilistic assessments with clear reasoning
- **Fast performance**: Local caching reduces API calls and improves speed
- **Flexible output**: JSON, YAML, or human-readable formats

## Installation

### System Requirements

- Python 3.10 or higher
- Internet connection for data source queries
- 50MB disk space for local cache

### Install from PyPI

```bash
pip install aletheia-probe
```

### Install from Source

```bash
git clone https://github.com/sustainet-guardian/aletheia-probe.git
cd aletheia-probe
pip install -e ".[dev]"
```

### Verify Installation

```bash
aletheia-probe --version
aletheia-probe --help
```

## Quick Start

### Basic Assessment

```bash
# Assess a single journal by name
aletheia-probe journal "Journal of Computer Science"

# Include ISSN for better accuracy
aletheia-probe journal "Nature (ISSN: 0028-0836)"

# Assess all journals in a BibTeX file
aletheia-probe bibtex references.bib
```

### Output Examples

**Standard output:**
```
Journal: Journal of Computer Science
Assessment: insufficient_data
Confidence: 0.15
Sources checked: DOAJ, Beall's List, Retraction Watch
Reasoning: Journal not found in major indexes
```

**JSON output:**
```bash
aletheia-probe journal --format json "Nature"
```

```json
{
  "assessment": "legitimate",
  "confidence": 0.95,
  "overall_score": 0.92,
  "backend_results": [
    {
      "backend_name": "DOAJ",
      "status": "found",
      "confidence": 0.90,
      "assessment": "legitimate"
    }
  ],
  "reasoning": [
    "Found in DOAJ with verified publisher information",
    "Strong publication history and editorial board"
  ]
}
```

## Command Line Usage

### Basic Commands

```bash
# Single journal assessment
aletheia-probe journal "Journal Name"

# BibTeX file assessment
aletheia-probe bibtex references.bib

# Multiple formats
aletheia-probe journal --format json "Journal Name"
aletheia-probe bibtex --format json references.bib
```

### BibTeX Batch Assessment

The tool can process entire BibTeX files, making it ideal for checking manuscript bibliographies, research databases, or academic collections.

#### Basic BibTeX Commands

```bash
# Assess all journals in a BibTeX file
aletheia-probe bibtex my_references.bib

# JSON output for integration with other tools
aletheia-probe bibtex --format json my_references.bib
```

#### Exit Code Behavior

The BibTeX command returns specific exit codes for automation:

- **Exit code 0**: No predatory journals found (safe to proceed)
- **Exit code 1**: Predatory journals detected (action required)

#### Integration Examples

**In shell scripts:**
```bash
if aletheia-probe bibtex references.bib; then
    echo "✅ Bibliography is clean - proceeding with submission"
else
    echo "❌ Predatory journals found - please review bibliography"
    exit 1
fi
```

**In CI/CD pipelines:**
```yaml
# GitHub Actions example
- name: Check Bibliography
  run: |
    aletheia-probe bibtex manuscript/references.bib
```

**In Makefiles:**
```makefile
check-refs:
	aletheia-probe bibtex references.bib || (echo "Bibliography check failed" && exit 1)

submit: check-refs
	# Proceed with submission only if bibliography is clean
	submit-manuscript.sh
```

#### BibTeX Output Examples

**Text format:**
```
BibTeX Assessment Summary
========================================
File: references.bib
Total entries processed: 25
Processing time: 12.3s

Assessment Results:
  Predatory journals: 2
  Legitimate journals: 18
  Insufficient data: 5

⚠️  WARNING: Predatory journals detected!

Detailed Results:
----------------------------------------
❌ International Journal of Computer Science Issues (predatory, confidence: 1.00)
    • Classified as predatory based on 2 source(s)
    • algerian_ministry: predatory (confidence: 0.90)
✅ Nature (legitimate, confidence: 0.85)
    • Classified as legitimate based on 1 source(s)
    • 📊 153 retraction(s): 0.034% rate (within normal range)
```

**JSON format for automation:**
```json
{
  "file_path": "references.bib",
  "total_entries": 25,
  "predatory_count": 2,
  "legitimate_count": 18,
  "insufficient_data_count": 5,
  "has_predatory_journals": true,
  "processing_time": 12.34,
  "assessment_results": [
    {
      "entry": {
        "key": "smith2023",
        "journal_name": "Nature",
        "entry_type": "article",
        "title": "Recent Advances in AI"
      },
      "assessment": {
        "assessment": "legitimate",
        "confidence": 0.85,
        "reasoning": ["Found in DOAJ with verified information"]
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

### Advanced Options

```bash
# Verbose output with detailed backend information
aletheia-probe journal --verbose "Journal Name"

# Different output format
aletheia-probe journal --format json "Journal Name"
```

### Batch Processing

#### BibTeX Files (Recommended)

```bash
# Assess entire bibliography
aletheia-probe bibtex references.bib

# Multiple BibTeX files
for file in *.bib; do aletheia-probe bibtex "$file"; done

# Save results
aletheia-probe bibtex --format json references.bib > assessment_results.json
```

#### Text Lists (Alternative)

```bash
# Process multiple journals from command line
echo "Journal of AI\nNature\nPredatory Journal" | xargs -I {} aletheia-probe journal "{}"

# From file
cat journals.txt | xargs -I {} aletheia-probe journal --format json "{}" > results.json
```

### Data Management

```bash
# Update backend data
aletheia-probe sync

# Clear local cache
aletheia-probe clear-cache

# Show configuration
aletheia-probe config
```

## Output Formats

### Text Format (Default)

Human-readable output suitable for terminal use:

```
Journal: PLOS ONE
Assessment: legitimate
Confidence: 0.88
Overall Score: 0.85

Sources:
  ✓ DOAJ: Found (confidence: 0.90)
  ✗ Beall's List: Not found
  ✓ Retraction Watch: Low retraction rate (confidence: 0.85)

Reasoning:
  • Listed in DOAJ directory with verified information
  • Retraction rate below 0.5% threshold
  • Established peer review process
```

### JSON Format

Structured data suitable for programmatic processing:

```json
{
  "input_query": "PLOS ONE",
  "assessment": "legitimate",
  "confidence": 0.88,
  "overall_score": 0.85,
  "backend_results": [
    {
      "backend_name": "DOAJ",
      "status": "found",
      "confidence": 0.90,
      "assessment": "legitimate",
      "data": {
        "issn": "1932-6203",
        "publisher": "Public Library of Science"
      },
      "response_time": 0.45
    }
  ],
  "metadata": {
    "name": "PLOS ONE",
    "issn": "1932-6203",
    "publisher": "Public Library of Science",
    "open_access": true
  },
  "reasoning": [
    "Listed in DOAJ directory with verified information",
    "Retraction rate below 0.5% threshold"
  ],
  "timestamp": "2024-11-08T12:30:45Z",
  "processing_time": 1.23
}
```

## Understanding Results

### Assessment Categories

- **`legitimate`**: Journal appears to be legitimate based on available evidence
- **`predatory`**: Journal shows characteristics of predatory practices
- **`insufficient_data`**: Not enough information to make confident assessment

### Confidence Scores

Confidence scores range from 0.0 to 1.0:

- **0.8-1.0**: High confidence - strong evidence available
- **0.6-0.8**: Moderate confidence - good evidence but some uncertainty
- **0.3-0.6**: Low confidence - limited evidence available
- **0.0-0.3**: Very low confidence - insufficient data

### Overall Score

The overall score combines individual backend results weighted by:
- Backend reliability and coverage
- Agreement between sources
- Quality of evidence found

### Reasoning

Each assessment includes human-readable explanations of:
- Which sources were checked
- What evidence was found (or not found)
- Why the assessment was made
- Any caveats or limitations

## Configuration

### Default Configuration

The tool works out of the box with sensible defaults. Configuration is optional for customization.

You can view and create the initial configuration using

```bash
aletheia-probe config
```

and overwrite only those parameters you want to change.

### Configuration File Locations

The tool looks for configuration files in this order:
1. File specified by `--config` option
2. `.aletheia-probe/config.yaml`
3. `./config/config.yaml`
4. `~/.config/aletheia-probe/config.yaml`
5. `/etc/aletheia-probe/config.yaml`

### Basic Configuration

Create `./.aletheia-probe/config.yaml`:

```yaml
# Backend configuration
backends:
  doaj:
    enabled: true
    weight: 1.0
    timeout: 10

  bealls:
    enabled: true
    weight: 0.8
    timeout: 5

  "Crossref Analyzer":
    enabled: true
    weight: 1.0
    timeout: 15
    email: "your.email@institution.org"  # Required for API access

  "OpenAlex Analyzer":
    enabled: true
    weight: 1.0
    timeout: 15
    email: "your.email@institution.org"  # Same email can be used

  retraction_watch:
    enabled: true
    weight: 0.7
    timeout: 15

# Assessment thresholds
heuristics:
  confidence_threshold: 0.6
  unknown_threshold: 0.3
  backend_agreement_bonus: 0.2

# Output preferences
output:
  format: json
  verbose: false
  include_raw_data: false

# Cache settings
cache:
  auto_sync: true
  cleanup_disabled: true
  update_threshold_days: 7
```

### API Email Configuration

Some backends (Crossref Analyzer, OpenAlex Analyzer, Cross-Validator) require email addresses for API identification. This follows "polite pool" access patterns to get better rate limits and support.

**Important**: Use a valid email address that you monitor. The email is sent in the User-Agent header for identification - no emails are sent to this address.

### Backend-Specific Settings

Each backend can be configured individually:

```yaml
backends:
  doaj:
    enabled: true
    weight: 1.0
    timeout: 10
    config:
      cache_ttl_hours: 48  # Custom cache duration

  "Crossref Analyzer":
    enabled: true
    weight: 1.0
    timeout: 15
    email: "research.team@university.edu"  # Required for API identification
    config:
      cache_ttl_hours: 72  # Extended cache for institutional use

  "OpenAlex Analyzer":
    enabled: true
    weight: 1.0
    timeout: 15
    email: "research.team@university.edu"  # Same email for consistency

  retraction_watch:
    enabled: true
    weight: 0.7
    timeout: 15
    config:
      gitlab_base_url: "https://gitlab.com"
      project_id: "your_project_id"
```

## Data Sources

### DOAJ (Directory of Open Access Journals)

**Purpose**: Identifies legitimate open access journals
**Coverage**: 22,000+ journals with verified information
**Data**: Journal metadata, publisher verification, quality standards

**What it checks**:
- Journal is listed in DOAJ directory
- Publisher information is verified
- Meets DOAJ quality criteria

### Beall's List Archives

**Purpose**: Historical database of potentially predatory journals
**Coverage**: Archives of Beall's original list and updates
**Data**: Journal names, publisher names, identifying characteristics

**What it checks**:
- Journal appears on predatory lists
- Publisher has history of questionable practices
- Pattern matching with known predatory characteristics

### Retraction Watch

**Purpose**: Quality assessment via retraction analysis
**Coverage**: Global retraction data across disciplines
**Data**: Retraction rates, patterns, journal performance metrics

**What it checks**:
- Journal's retraction rate compared to field average
- Pattern of retractions (legitimate vs. misconduct)
- Overall journal quality indicators

### Institutional Lists

**Purpose**: Custom whitelists/blacklists from institutions
**Coverage**: Institution-specific approved/disapproved journals
**Data**: Local policies, regional preferences, subject-specific lists

**What it checks**:
- Institutional approval status
- Regional or disciplinary considerations
- Local policy compliance

## Best Practices

### For Researchers

1. **Use BibTeX for multiple journals**: Batch process entire bibliographies for efficiency
2. **Use ISSN when available**: More accurate than name matching
3. **Check during writing**: Assess journals as you add references, not just at submission
4. **Consider context**: Factor in your field and institution
5. **Verify results**: Use tool output as guidance, not absolute truth
6. **Integrate with workflow**: Use exit codes in scripts for automated checking
7. **Report issues**: Help improve accuracy by reporting problems

### For Institutions

1. **Deploy BibTeX checking**: Integrate into submission systems and review processes
2. **Configure backends**: Enable relevant sources for your needs
3. **Set appropriate thresholds**: Adjust confidence levels for your policies
4. **Regular updates**: Keep data sources current with sync commands
5. **Policy integration**: Use tool results within broader evaluation frameworks
6. **Automated workflows**: Use exit codes for systematic bibliography validation
7. **Training**: Ensure users understand tool limitations and proper usage

### For Assessment Accuracy

1. **Provide complete information**: Include ISSN, full journal name
2. **Check spelling**: Ensure journal names are spelled correctly
3. **Use official names**: Use journal's official title, not abbreviations
4. **Consider timing**: New journals may not be in indexes yet
5. **Validate edge cases**: Manually verify uncertain results

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

#### BibTeX parsing errors

**Causes**:
- Invalid BibTeX syntax
- Corrupted or incomplete BibTeX file
- Unsupported character encoding

**Solutions**:
```bash
# Check BibTeX file syntax
bibtex-tidy --check references.bib

# Try with a minimal test file first
echo '@article{test, journal={Nature}, year={2023}}' > test.bib
aletheia-probe bibtex test.bib

# Check file encoding
file references.bib
```

#### BibTeX returns "no journals found"

**Causes**:
- BibTeX entries missing journal fields
- Only conference proceedings or book chapters (no journals)
- Journal fields use non-standard names

**Solutions**:
- Ensure entries have `journal`, or `journaltitle`, fields
- Check that entry types are appropriate (article, inproceedings, etc.)
- Use `--verbose` to see which entries were processed

#### "Journal not found" for known legitimate journal

**Causes**:
- Journal too new to be indexed
- Spelling variations not recognized
- ISSN not provided or incorrect

**Solutions**:
- Check journal's official website for correct name/ISSN
- Try alternate name formats
- Verify journal is actually indexed in major databases

#### Low confidence scores for legitimate journals

**Causes**:
- Limited data availability
- New journal with little history
- Regional or specialized journal not well-covered

**Solutions**:
- Check journal's indexing status manually
- Consider institutional policies
- Use multiple assessment methods

#### Timeout errors

**Causes**:
- Network connectivity issues
- Backend service temporarily unavailable
- Timeout settings too aggressive

**Solutions**:
```bash
# Check connectivity
curl -I https://doaj.org
```

#### Cache issues

**Causes**:
- Corrupted cache files
- Outdated cached data
- Permission issues

**Solutions**:
```bash
# Clear cache
aletheia-probe clear-cache

# Update data
aletheia-probe sync
```

### Getting Help

1. **Check this documentation**: Especially troubleshooting sections
2. **Search GitHub issues**: Look for similar problems
3. **See Logfile**: in the directory `.aletheia-probe`
4. **Create GitHub issue**: Include error messages and context
5. **Community support**: Engage with user community

### Error Messages

**"Invalid ISSN format"**: Verify ISSN format (XXXX-XXXX)
**"Configuration error"**: Check YAML syntax in config file
**"Cache write error"**: Check disk space and permissions
**"API rate limit exceeded"**: Wait or reduce request frequency

### Custom Backends

Extend the tool with custom data sources by implementing the Backend interface. See [API Reference](api-reference.md) for details.

### Integration with Workflows

The tool can be integrated into:
- Manuscript submission systems
- Institutional repository workflows
- Grant application review processes
- Academic policy enforcement systems

See the [API Reference](api-reference.md) for programmatic integration examples.

Commit message:

refactor: Remove legacy backend support and address PR feedback
- Remove all legacy backend registration and support
- Simplify BackendRegistry to factory-only pattern
- Fix contradictory documentation about email being required vs optional
- Remove monitoring requirement from email docs (no emails sent)
- Clean up unrelated cache TTL changes from email feature
- Update all backends and tests to use factory registration
- Maintain only factory-based backend creation for configurability

[AI-assisted]

docs/user-guide.md, after:

# User Guide

This comprehensive guide covers all aspects of using the Journal Assessment Tool for evaluating academic journals.

## Table of Contents

1. [Overview](#overview)
2. [Installation](#installation)
3. [Quick Start](#quick-start)
4. [Command Line Usage](#command-line-usage)
5. [Output Formats](#output-formats)
6. [Understanding Results](#understanding-results)
7. [Configuration](#configuration)
8. [Data Sources](#data-sources)
9. [Best Practices](#best-practices)
10. [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)

## Overview

The Journal Assessment Tool helps researchers and institutions evaluate whether academic journals are legitimate or potentially predatory by checking multiple authoritative data sources and providing confidence-scored assessments.

### Key Features

- **Multi-source verification**: Combines DOAJ, Beall's List, Retraction Watch, and institutional data
- **BibTeX batch processing**: Assess entire bibliographies from BibTeX files with automated exit codes
- **Intelligent matching**: Handles name variations, ISSNs, and publisher information
- **Confidence scoring**: Provides probabilistic assessments with clear reasoning
- **Fast performance**: Local caching reduces API calls and improves speed
- **Flexible output**: JSON, YAML, or human-readable formats

## Installation

### System Requirements

- Python 3.10 or higher
- Internet connection for data source queries
- 50MB disk space for local cache

### Install from PyPI

```bash
pip install aletheia-probe
```

### Install from Source

```bash
git clone https://github.com/sustainet-guardian/aletheia-probe.git
cd aletheia-probe
pip install -e ".[dev]"
```

### Verify Installation

```bash
aletheia-probe --version
aletheia-probe --help
```

## Quick Start

### Basic Assessment

```bash
# Assess a single journal by name
aletheia-probe journal "Journal of Computer Science"

# Include ISSN for better accuracy
aletheia-probe journal "Nature (ISSN: 0028-0836)"

# Assess all journals in a BibTeX file
aletheia-probe bibtex references.bib
```

### Output Examples

**Standard output:**
```
Journal: Journal of Computer Science
Assessment: insufficient_data
Confidence: 0.15
Sources checked: DOAJ, Beall's List, Retraction Watch
Reasoning: Journal not found in major indexes
```

**JSON output:**
```bash
aletheia-probe journal --format json "Nature"
```

```json
{
  "assessment": "legitimate",
  "confidence": 0.95,
  "overall_score": 0.92,
  "backend_results": [
    {
      "backend_name": "DOAJ",
      "status": "found",
      "confidence": 0.90,
      "assessment": "legitimate"
    }
  ],
  "reasoning": [
    "Found in DOAJ with verified publisher information",
    "Strong publication history and editorial board"
  ]
}
```

## Command Line Usage

### Basic Commands

```bash
# Single journal assessment
aletheia-probe journal "Journal Name"

# BibTeX file assessment
aletheia-probe bibtex references.bib

# Multiple formats
aletheia-probe journal --format json "Journal Name"
aletheia-probe bibtex --format json references.bib
```

### BibTeX Batch Assessment

The tool can process entire BibTeX files, making it ideal for checking manuscript bibliographies, research databases, or academic collections.

#### Basic BibTeX Commands

```bash
# Assess all journals in a BibTeX file
aletheia-probe bibtex my_references.bib

# JSON output for integration with other tools
aletheia-probe bibtex --format json my_references.bib
```

#### Exit Code Behavior

The BibTeX command returns specific exit codes for automation:

- **Exit code 0**: No predatory journals found (safe to proceed)
- **Exit code 1**: Predatory journals detected (action required)

#### Integration Examples

**In shell scripts:**
```bash
if aletheia-probe bibtex references.bib; then
    echo "✅ Bibliography is clean - proceeding with submission"
else
    echo "❌ Predatory journals found - please review bibliography"
    exit 1
fi
```

**In CI/CD pipelines:**
```yaml
# GitHub Actions example
- name: Check Bibliography
  run: |
    aletheia-probe bibtex manuscript/references.bib
```

**In Makefiles:**
```makefile
check-refs:
	aletheia-probe bibtex references.bib || (echo "Bibliography check failed" && exit 1)

submit: check-refs
	# Proceed with submission only if bibliography is clean
	submit-manuscript.sh
```

#### BibTeX Output Examples

**Text format:**
```
BibTeX Assessment Summary
========================================
File: references.bib
Total entries processed: 25
Processing time: 12.3s

Assessment Results:
  Predatory journals: 2
  Legitimate journals: 18
  Insufficient data: 5

⚠️  WARNING: Predatory journals detected!

Detailed Results:
----------------------------------------
❌ International Journal of Computer Science Issues (predatory, confidence: 1.00)
    • Classified as predatory based on 2 source(s)
    • algerian_ministry: predatory (confidence: 0.90)
✅ Nature (legitimate, confidence: 0.85)
    • Classified as legitimate based on 1 source(s)
    • 📊 153 retraction(s): 0.034% rate (within normal range)
```

**JSON format for automation:**
```json
{
  "file_path": "references.bib",
  "total_entries": 25,
  "predatory_count": 2,
  "legitimate_count": 18,
  "insufficient_data_count": 5,
  "has_predatory_journals": true,
  "processing_time": 12.34,
  "assessment_results": [
    {
      "entry": {
        "key": "smith2023",
        "journal_name": "Nature",
        "entry_type": "article",
        "title": "Recent Advances in AI"
      },
      "assessment": {
        "assessment": "legitimate",
        "confidence": 0.85,
        "reasoning": ["Found in DOAJ with verified information"]
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

### Advanced Options

```bash
# Verbose output with detailed backend information
aletheia-probe journal --verbose "Journal Name"

# Different output format
aletheia-probe journal --format json "Journal Name"
```

### Batch Processing

#### BibTeX Files (Recommended)

```bash
# Assess entire bibliography
aletheia-probe bibtex references.bib

# Multiple BibTeX files
for file in *.bib; do aletheia-probe bibtex "$file"; done

# Save results
aletheia-probe bibtex --format json references.bib > assessment_results.json
```

#### Text Lists (Alternative)

```bash
# Process multiple journals from command line
echo "Journal of AI\nNature\nPredatory Journal" | xargs -I {} aletheia-probe journal "{}"

# From file
cat journals.txt | xargs -I {} aletheia-probe journal --format json "{}" > results.json
```

### Data Management

```bash
# Update backend data
aletheia-probe sync

# Clear local cache
aletheia-probe clear-cache

# Show configuration
aletheia-probe config
```

## Output Formats

### Text Format (Default)

Human-readable output suitable for terminal use:

```
Journal: PLOS ONE
Assessment: legitimate
Confidence: 0.88
Overall Score: 0.85

Sources:
  ✓ DOAJ: Found (confidence: 0.90)
  ✗ Beall's List: Not found
  ✓ Retraction Watch: Low retraction rate (confidence: 0.85)

Reasoning:
  • Listed in DOAJ directory with verified information
  • Retraction rate below 0.5% threshold
  • Established peer review process
```

### JSON Format

Structured data suitable for programmatic processing:

```json
{
  "input_query": "PLOS ONE",
  "assessment": "legitimate",
  "confidence": 0.88,
  "overall_score": 0.85,
  "backend_results": [
    {
      "backend_name": "DOAJ",
      "status": "found",
      "confidence": 0.90,
      "assessment": "legitimate",
      "data": {
        "issn": "1932-6203",
        "publisher": "Public Library of Science"
      },
      "response_time": 0.45
    }
  ],
  "metadata": {
    "name": "PLOS ONE",
    "issn": "1932-6203",
    "publisher": "Public Library of Science",
    "open_access": true
  },
  "reasoning": [
    "Listed in DOAJ directory with verified information",
    "Retraction rate below 0.5% threshold"
  ],
  "timestamp": "2024-11-08T12:30:45Z",
  "processing_time": 1.23
}
```

## Understanding Results

### Assessment Categories

- **`legitimate`**: Journal appears to be legitimate based on available evidence
- **`predatory`**: Journal shows characteristics of predatory practices
- **`insufficient_data`**: Not enough information to make confident assessment

### Confidence Scores

Confidence scores range from 0.0 to 1.0:

- **0.8-1.0**: High confidence - strong evidence available
- **0.6-0.8**: Moderate confidence - good evidence but some uncertainty
- **0.3-0.6**: Low confidence - limited evidence available
- **0.0-0.3**: Very low confidence - insufficient data

### Overall Score

The overall score combines individual backend results weighted by:
- Backend reliability and coverage
- Agreement between sources
- Quality of evidence found

### Reasoning

Each assessment includes human-readable explanations of:
- Which sources were checked
- What evidence was found (or not found)
- Why the assessment was made
- Any caveats or limitations

## Configuration

### Default Configuration

The tool works out of the box with sensible defaults. Configuration is optional for customization.

You can view and create the initial configuration using

```bash
aletheia-probe config
```

and overwrite only those parameters you want to change.

### Configuration File Locations

The tool looks for configuration files in this order:
1. File specified by `--config` option
2. `.aletheia-probe/config.yaml`
3. `./config/config.yaml`
4. `~/.config/aletheia-probe/config.yaml`
5. `/etc/aletheia-probe/config.yaml`

### Basic Configuration

Create `./.aletheia-probe/config.yaml`:

```yaml
# Backend configuration
backends:
  doaj:
    enabled: true
    weight: 1.0
    timeout: 10

  bealls:
    enabled: true
    weight: 0.8
    timeout: 5

  "Crossref Analyzer":
    enabled: true
    weight: 1.0
    timeout: 15
    email: "your.email@institution.org"  # Optional for API identification

  "OpenAlex Analyzer":
    enabled: true
    weight: 1.0
    timeout: 15
    email: "your.email@institution.org"  # Optional for API identification

  retraction_watch:
    enabled: true
    weight: 0.7
    timeout: 15

# Assessment thresholds
heuristics:
  confidence_threshold: 0.6
  unknown_threshold: 0.3
  backend_agreement_bonus: 0.2

# Output preferences
output:
  format: json
  verbose: false
  include_raw_data: false

# Cache settings
cache:
  auto_sync: true
  cleanup_disabled: true
  update_threshold_days: 7
```

### API Email Configuration

Some backends (Crossref Analyzer, OpenAlex Analyzer, Cross-Validator) require email addresses for API identification. This follows "polite pool" access patterns to get better rate limits and support.

**Important**: Use a valid email address. The email is sent only in the User-Agent header for API identification - no emails are sent to this address.

### Backend-Specific Settings

Each backend can be configured individually:

```yaml
backends:
  doaj:
    enabled: true
    weight: 1.0
    timeout: 10

  "Crossref Analyzer":
    enabled: true
    weight: 1.0
    timeout: 15
    email: "research.team@university.edu"  # Optional for API identification
    config:
      cache_ttl_hours: 72  # Extended cache for institutional use

  "OpenAlex Analyzer":
    enabled: true
    weight: 1.0
    timeout: 15
    email: "research.team@university.edu"  # Optional for API identification

  retraction_watch:
    enabled: true
    weight: 0.7
    timeout: 15
    config:
      gitlab_base_url: "https://gitlab.com"
      project_id: "your_project_id"
```

## Data Sources

### DOAJ (Directory of Open Access Journals)

**Purpose**: Identifies legitimate open access journals
**Coverage**: 22,000+ journals with verified information
**Data**: Journal metadata, publisher verification, quality standards

**What it checks**:
- Journal is listed in DOAJ directory
- Publisher information is verified
- Meets DOAJ quality criteria

### Beall's List Archives

**Purpose**: Historical database of potentially predatory journals
**Coverage**: Archives of Beall's original list and updates
**Data**: Journal names, publisher names, identifying characteristics

**What it checks**:
- Journal appears on predatory lists
- Publisher has history of questionable practices
- Pattern matching with known predatory characteristics

### Retraction Watch

**Purpose**: Quality assessment via retraction analysis
**Coverage**: Global retraction data across disciplines
**Data**: Retraction rates, patterns, journal performance metrics

**What it checks**:
- Journal's retraction rate compared to field average
- Pattern of retractions (legitimate vs. misconduct)
- Overall journal quality indicators

### Institutional Lists

**Purpose**: Custom whitelists/blacklists from institutions
**Coverage**: Institution-specific approved/disapproved journals
**Data**: Local policies, regional preferences, subject-specific lists

**What it checks**:
- Institutional approval status
- Regional or disciplinary considerations
- Local policy compliance

## Best Practices

### For Researchers

1. **Use BibTeX for multiple journals**: Batch process entire bibliographies for efficiency
2. **Use ISSN when available**: More accurate than name matching
3. **Check during writing**: Assess journals as you add references, not just at submission
4. **Consider context**: Factor in your field and institution
5. **Verify results**: Use tool output as guidance, not absolute truth
6. **Integrate with workflow**: Use exit codes in scripts for automated checking
7. **Report issues**: Help improve accuracy by reporting problems

### For Institutions

1. **Deploy BibTeX checking**: Integrate into submission systems and review processes
2. **Configure backends**: Enable relevant sources for your needs
3. **Set appropriate thresholds**: Adjust confidence levels for your policies
4. **Regular updates**: Keep data sources current with sync commands
5. **Policy integration**: Use tool results within broader evaluation frameworks
6. **Automated workflows**: Use exit codes for systematic bibliography validation
7. **Training**: Ensure users understand tool limitations and proper usage

### For Assessment Accuracy

1. **Provide complete information**: Include ISSN, full journal name
2. **Check spelling**: Ensure journal names are spelled correctly
3. **Use official names**: Use journal's official title, not abbreviations
4. **Consider timing**: New journals may not be in indexes yet
5. **Validate edge cases**: Manually verify uncertain results

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

#### BibTeX parsing errors

**Causes**:
- Invalid BibTeX syntax
- Corrupted or incomplete BibTeX file
- Unsupported character encoding

**Solutions**:
```bash
# Check BibTeX file syntax
bibtex-tidy --check references.bib

# Try with a minimal test file first
echo '@article{test, journal={Nature}, year={2023}}' > test.bib
aletheia-probe bibtex test.bib

# Check file encoding
file references.bib
```

#### BibTeX returns "no journals found"

**Causes**:
- BibTeX entries missing journal fields
- Only conference proceedings or book chapters (no journals)
- Journal fields use non-standard names

**Solutions**:
- Ensure entries have `journal`, or `journaltitle`, fields
- Check that entry types are appropriate (article, inproceedings, etc.)
- Use `--verbose` to see which entries were processed

#### "Journal not found" for known legitimate journal

**Causes**:
- Journal too new to be indexed
- Spelling variations not recognized
- ISSN not provided or incorrect

**Solutions**:
- Check journal's official website for correct name/ISSN
- Try alternate name formats
- Verify journal is actually indexed in major databases

#### Low confidence scores for legitimate journals

**Causes**:
- Limited data availability
- New journal with little history
- Regional or specialized journal not well-covered

**Solutions**:
- Check journal's indexing status manually
- Consider institutional policies
- Use multiple assessment methods

#### Timeout errors

**Causes**:
- Network connectivity issues
- Backend service temporarily unavailable
- Timeout settings too aggressive

**Solutions**:
```bash
# Check connectivity
curl -I https://doaj.org
```

#### Cache issues

**Causes**:
- Corrupted cache files
- Outdated cached data
- Permission issues

**Solutions**:
```bash
# Clear cache
aletheia-probe clear-cache

# Update data
aletheia-probe sync
```

### Getting Help

1. **Check this documentation**: Especially troubleshooting sections
2. **Search GitHub issues**: Look for similar problems
3. **See Logfile**: in the directory `.aletheia-probe`
4. **Create GitHub issue**: Include error messages and context
5. **Community support**: Engage with user community

### Error Messages

**"Invalid ISSN format"**: Verify ISSN format (XXXX-XXXX)
**"Configuration error"**: Check YAML syntax in config file
**"Cache write error"**: Check disk space and permissions
**"API rate limit exceeded"**: Wait or reduce request frequency

### Custom Backends

Extend the tool with custom data sources by implementing the Backend interface. See [API Reference](api-reference.md) for details.

### Integration with Workflows

The tool can be integrated into:
- Manuscript submission systems
- Institutional repository workflows
- Grant application review processes
- Academic policy enforcement systems

See the [API Reference](api-reference.md) for programmatic integration examples.
